feat: facilitating example contribution (#596)
ansys/pyansys-dev-guide: doc/source/how-to/documenting.rst

--------------------------------------------------

A common challenge in libraries is the lack of examples. Examples are
critical for users to understand how to use the library and present new
functionality. They also serve as a mechanism to educate users on best practices.

To encourage contributions of examples, it is important to provide a clear
structure for contributors to follow. The build process should also be straightforward.

Two best practices for examples are:

- **Providing a template**: Ensures that contributors follow a consistent structure and
  simplifies the process of getting started. The template should include all necessary
  information, such as the name of the example, a description, and the code itself.
- **Verifying the example**: Ensures that the example works as expected and helps catch
  errors before submission. The verification process should involve running the example
  and checking the output. If the example fails, it should be easy to identify and fix the issue.
- **Making the example usable in multiple contexts**: Ensures that the example can be
  usable by a user reading the documentation, an application engineer using the library

>   through a Notebook, or a developer including the example to the documentation.

Author: ```suggestion
  through a notebook, or a developer including the example to the documentation.
```

Providing a template
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here are examples of how to promote the use of templates for examples:

- `PyAnsys Geometry examples template <PyAnsys_geometry_examples_template_>`_
- `PyPrimeMesh examples template <PyPrimemesh_examples_template_>`_

These templates are also referenced in the contributing guidelines:

- `PyAnsys Geometry example contribution guidelines <PyAnsys_geometry_examples_contribution_>`_

Verifying examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The verification process depends on the library and the tools used for generating the examples.
Within the PyAnsys ecosystem, Sphinx Gallery and NBSphinx are commonly used to generate examples,
with slightly different build processes for each library.

The following approach can be applied across libraries:

> - Create a ``Makefile`` target that runs a specific example.

Reviewer: Maybe this can be skipped if we add the specification I mentioned right after

This target is used to execute the example and check the output. If the example fails,
it should be straightforward to identify and resolve the issue. For instance, PyAnsys Geometry

> includes a ``make`` target for this purpose:

Reviewer: I was thinking that we could also specify that the documentation will **only** renders the specific example which results in a faster output. It can be very useful for long documentation runs or for CI/CD pipelines running on a single VM.

> This target is used to execute the example and check the output. If the example fails,
> it should be straightforward to identify and resolve the issue. For instance, PyAnsys Geometry
> includes a ``make`` target for this purpose:

Author: ```suggestion
This target is used to execute the example and check the output. Only one example is build in this
case, making it very useful for documentation builds that last very long. If the example fails,
it should be straightforward to identify and resolve the issue. For instance, PyAnsys Geometry
includes a ``make`` target for this purpose:
```

.. code-block:: console

    ./make.bat single-example examples/01_getting_started/01_math.mystnb

.. code-block:: console

    make single-example examples/01_getting_started/01_math.mystnb

The pull request introducing this feature is: `PyAnsys Geometry PR #1893 <PyAnsys_geometry_pull_1893_>`_
This implementation is specific to NB Sphinx, but the concept of creating a target to run a specific
example and verify its output can be adapted to other libraries.

Making the example usable in multiple contexts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A core objective when designing examples is to ensure they can be used seamlessly across multiple

> contexts: whether it's by end users exploring them interactively, by documentation tools rendering

Author: ```suggestion
contexts: whether it is by end users exploring them interactively, by documentation tools rendering
```
Check for other contractions..

them for the web, or by engineers verifying their correctness and updating them. Achieving this
flexibility requires a careful balance between accessibility, structure, and maintainability.

> To support this goal, we recommend a workflow where examples are authored and maintained as plain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A recommended approach to support this goal is to author and maintain examples as plain
```

> Python scripts, but using `Jupytext <https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ to treat those

Author: Links should go to ``links.rst`` file

scripts as notebooks when needed. Formatting your examples using the

> `light format <https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/formats-scripts.html#the-light-format>`_

Author: Same comment as before

makes them makes them fully compatible with JupyterLab, where they can be opened, edited, and

> executed just like traditional notebooks - all without needing a IPYNB file. Here is an example

Author: ```suggestion
executed just like traditional notebooks - all without needing a ``.ipynb`` file. Here is an example
```

Reviewer 2: From documentation feedback, I though we should use capital letters when mentionned format file, e.g. PDF files. @PipKat Can you let us know which approach should be followed ?

Reviewer 3: When referencing only the extension portion, you should use capital letters, so  "... needing an IPYNB file."

Author: Okay, closing suggestion. Thanks @PipKat!

    ./make.bat single-example examples/01_getting_started/01_math.mystnb

.. code-block:: console

    make single-example examples/01_getting_started/01_math.mystnb

The pull request introducing this feature is: `PyAnsys Geometry PR #1893 <PyAnsys_geometry_pull_1893_>`_
This implementation is specific to NB Sphinx, but the concept of creating a target to run a specific
example and verify its output can be adapted to other libraries.

Making the example usable in multiple contexts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A core objective when designing examples is to ensure they can be used seamlessly across multiple
contexts: whether it is by end users exploring them interactively, by documentation tools rendering
them for the web, or by engineers verifying their correctness and updating them. Achieving this
flexibility requires a careful balance between accessibility, structure, and maintainability.

A recommended approach to support this goal is to author and maintain examples as plain
Python scripts, but using `Jupytext <Jupytext_>`_ to treat those
scripts as notebooks when needed. Formatting your examples using the
`Jupytext light format <Jupytext_light_format_>`_

> makes them makes them fully compatible with JupyterLab, where they can be opened, edited, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
makes them fully compatible with JupyterLab, where they can be opened, edited, and
```

If you have questions about SEO, email the `PyAnsys Core team <pyansys_core_email_>`_.

Facilitating contributions in the form of examples
--------------------------------------------------

A common challenge in libraries is the lack of examples. Examples are
critical for users to understand how to use the library and present new
functionality. They also serve as a mechanism to educate users on best practices.

To encourage contributions of examples, it is important to provide a clear
structure for contributors to follow. The build process should also be straightforward.

Two best practices for examples are:

- **Providing a template**: Ensures that contributors follow a consistent structure and
  simplifies the process of getting started. The template should include all necessary
  information, such as the name of the example, a description, and the code itself.
- **Verifying the example**: Ensures that the example works as expected and helps catch
  errors before submission. The verification process should involve running the example
  and checking the output. If the example fails, it should be easy to identify and fix the issue.

Providing a template
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Here is an example of how to promote the use of templates for examples:

Reviewer 4: The doc looks good overall! I just had one suggestion

> Here is an example of how to promote the use of templates for examples:

Author: Thanks @klmcadams !
